---
title: 1. Introduction to Christ-Centered Spirituality
description: Introduction to Christ-Centered Spirituality
part: "1"
pubDate: 'Aug 26, 2024'
heroImage: '/blog-placeholder-3.jpg'
---

Is your soul thirsty? The book you now hold is a *meditation guide* for all world-weary wanderers who thirst for a spiritual reality that satisfies the human soul. It is an *instruction manual* for all who know they have a soul and want to bring it to life! It is a *guidebook* for finding that ancient and reliable path which for many centuries has led saints and sinners alike into a deeper spiritual life, the Way of Christ. Plunge into the rushing torrents of living water cascading through the heights. Bathe in the Presence of the Living God. Christ beckons you: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. Whoever believes in me...streams of living water will flow from within him.”

Let me propose a new life goal: *to know Christ and be known by him.* This is not the same as knowing *about* Christ. Don’t read with the cold detachment of a scientist in a laboratory, objectively trying to dissect and explain. Instead, approach God with the curious wonder of a child. Come as a pilgrim, a learner, a lover, a mystic, an artist. Read slowly, meditate, participate, reflect upon and reason through, question and express your thoughts. Explore the obscure landscape of your own subterranean soul. Every question mark you see in this book is an icon, an invitation to pause and activate your intelligence and imagination, a hyperlink to access your memories, emotions, and desires. Look beyond these black-and-white letters on a page. Reach out with child-like fascination to touch the fiery, invisible Presence behind them.

What is Christ-centered spirituality? It is an *orientation toward life that centers upon the person of Jesus Christ as the definitive entry point into life-giving connection with God*—that infinite, creative Spirit of Spirits that fills our universe and beyond. According to the New Testament documents, *this is the only path to life at its fullest.* It is in Christ that we experience human flourishing—the *good life*—the most natural and ideal state of existence for all humanity. It is what you were made for—a life aligned with eternity, a cooperative friendship with the Creator. It will shape your interior world and color your exterior world to form a self without selfishness, an animated soul without animosity or hatred, a heart calmly beating with quiet confidence, brimming over with love and joy—passionate, authentic, fearless, and free.

Build a life of substance on solid bedrock, tested through the ages, tried across the globe. Apprenticeship to Jesus stands in sharp contrast to the do-it-yourself, “designer spiritualities” of today which are founded on the shifting sands of modern opinion and preference.

A Christ-centered spiritual life is open to ordinary people of all walks of life: businesspeople and the unemployed, children and adults, students and teachers, customer service representatives, computer technicians, and fast-food workers. All across the glorious spectrum of human diversity, from every tribe and nation, everyone is invited. This is not an unattainable realm reserved only for a special class of esoteric, religious types with lots of time on their hands. Nothing can disqualify you from this world-transcending life—not your past, your mistakes, your hurts, your weaknesses, your failures, your doubts, even your sins. Nothing can separate the seeking soul from the furious love of Christ.

Christ-centered spirituality is a journey of discovery: a seeking and a finding, yet seeking still! It is not so much doctrines and dogmas as it is a real life conversation with the Absolute, “Our Father who art in heaven.” It is experience-able and practice-able, more difficult than training for the Olympics and easier than breathing. It is an *initiation* into an interactive relationship with your Maker. It is a *virtue ethic* built around the great Exemplar of Infinite Life, Jesus of Nazareth. It is a *catechesis*: a basic training program for living in a new atmosphere—the life-giving environment of the Spirit, the soul’s true home. It will not make you into some kind of “expert.” If you are using it for that purpose, it may even prove harmful. These pages provide only a scaffolding to construct and cultivate your own familiar friendship with God. Apart from his ethereal Presence, it will not do much for you. You yourself must hear the soundless voice calling. You must sense the intangible touch deep within. This book is only a supplement to the Scriptures, relationships, experiences, sufferings, and other divinely decided designs that truly transform your sojourning soul.

Ask yourself: “*What think ye of Christ?*” Your answer to that question will determine all else. Can I assume that you truly want to follow Christ? Are you convinced (or willing to be convinced) that Jesus Christ knew the true ways of the spiritual life, or more accurately, *is the Way, the Truth, and the Life*? Many misgivings about Jesus are really reactions to the appalling abuses, the horrific deformities, and glaring imperfections of those who wear his name. So, let’s clear away the underbrush, the dead bark that has often overgrown and choked the flowing life out of the historic Christian church. Might we avoid these excesses? *This is what Christ-centered spirituality is not*: it is not a justification for judgmental, condemning attitudes towards “those dirty sinners” nor is it a divinely sanctioned excuse for careless disregard of our own sin since “we are forgiven.” It is not a competitive endeavor for showing off our Bible knowledge, how long or beautifully we can pray, how convincingly we talk “theology,” nor any other of the amusing contests that religious people often play. It is not a narrow-minded attempt to explain away all of life’s mysteries with shallow cliches, nor is it an evasion of our God-given responsibility to think for ourselves. Neither is it a naive, cult-like conformity to a subculture of plastic smiles and bland “niceness”—nor of offensive and hateful hostility! It does not consist of pressure tactics to coerce converts into manufacturing ecstatic experiences or perfect profession of approved doctrines. Nor is it a method of controlling the world to ensure a prosperous and successful life of individualistic health and wealth and happiness and comfort. Whenever Christ encountered such self-serving, ego-driven religion, he opposed it vehemently! All these unhealthy extremes are distortions, deviations from the perfect center, which is Christ himself. And when you live from this Center, you will find it is a *way of life perfectly suited to your own unique, God-woven personality*.

So, embark with me on a voyage of discovery. First, find a seaworthy vessel: if you have not already enlisted with a Christ-centered *community of faith*, find a crew to sail with on the shoreless sea of mystery. Then, find a mentor—a seasoned sea captain who can show you the ropes, help you chart your course and navigate the inevitable twists and turns of your own inward odyssey. You will also need a clear translation of the *Holy Bible*, which is your compass, your map, your ultimate sourcebook. Lastly, pick up a *journal* (any cheap notebook will do) to record your reflections and conversations with God. This is the travel log of your soul’s journey into the soundless depths of God. For the next few months, try to set aside at least half an hour a day to cover each chapter and meditation exercise.

But first, it is only fair to warn you from the start that while this adventure holds many indescribable joys, it also holds many difficulties, dangers, desolations, and dark nights. It is not for the faint of heart. There is no victory except through battle; no glory but through testing. *Christ-centered spirituality is not something you can “dabble” in—it is life-consuming, a commitment to total immersion!* You cannot simply add “knowing Christ” on to a “me-centered” life. This is not a self-indulgent ego-massage to help you to feel better—our aim is to help you to become better. Jesus intends to replace your natural life with a supernatural life of a very different substance (although it may resemble the old life in many superficial ways). If a life-altering encounter with your Creator is not what you desire, *please go no further.* This book is not for you at this time.

---

## MEDITATION EXERCISES

1. Open your journal (if you don’t have one yet, use a blank sheet of paper) and begin to describe some individuals or groups that made a negative impression of what Christ was supposed to be all about.

2. Next, describe some of the places and people whose lives provided a positive picture for you of Jesus Christ. Do you need to contact them and thank them for their extraordinary example?

3. What are the characteristics of Christ that most draw you to him?

4. End with a prayer, telling Jesus what you love about him. Tell him of your soul’s thirst. Tell him that you want to know him and be known by him… Ask him to remove the scales from the eyelids of your soul that you might see him more clearly. Then wait and listen. See what he replies…
